docs: validate public input first version (#648)
yetanotherco/aligned_layer: docs/guides/3_validating_public_input.md

# Validating public input

You can validate that the public input of the proof sent to Aligned for verification is correct in a few simple steps.

> 

Reviewer: I would add a little more context on why we would like to do this. For example:

> In some applications, you would like to attest that other party has done some computation correctly and actually do something with the result of that computation. For this, the other party should have interacted with Aligned first and obtained the `AlignedVerificationData`, a receipt indicating that the proof of the computation was verified correctly.
The application should receive the Aligned verification data as well as the result of the computation. After validating that the proof was verified in Aligned, it should check that the posted result is indeed the same as the one commited in the Aligned verification data.

Something similar to that should give a bit more context to why is this important

Author: Solved in [098bd93](https://github.com/yetanotherco/aligned_layer/pull/648/commits/098bd93274cdae2f9d06a90212af20c96b65ceea)

In this case, the Fibonacci number to be calculated is **500** and the last two numbers of the sequence modulo 7919 are **1268** and **1926**.

This guide assumes you are in the `examples/validating-public-input` directory.

## Generate your ZK Proof

To submit proofs to Aligned and get them verified, first you need to generate those proofs. Every proving system has its own way of generating proofs.

You can find examples on how to generate proofs in the [generating proofs guide](4_generating_proofs.md).

To generate the proof needed to try this example, run `make generate_risc_zero_fibonacci_proof`.

## Write your smart contract

To check if a proof was verified in Aligned, you need to make a call to the `AlignedServiceManager` contract inside your smart contract.

Also, you will need a way to check that the proven program is the correct one.

> The Aligned CLI provides a way for you to get the verification key commitment without actually generating and submitting a proof.

Reviewer: though technically correct, the term `verification key` here appears without much context and is confusing for a user without deep zk technical knowledge. Let's explain what the term refers to or just remove it

Author: Solved in [b6f3356](https://github.com/yetanotherco/aligned_layer/pull/648/commits/b6f335654a66bfc92eeba9b60f605509bad3ec0b)

                abi.encodeWithSignature(
                    "verifyBatchInclusion(bytes32,bytes32,bytes32,bytes20,bytes32,bytes,uint256)",
                    proofCommitment,
                    pubInputCommitment,
                    provingSystemAuxDataCommitment,
                    proofGeneratorAddr,
                    batchMerkleRoot,
                    merkleProof,
                    verificationDataBatchIndex
                )
            );

        require(callWasSuccessful, "static_call failed");

        return abi.decode(proofIsIncluded, (bool));
    }

    function bytesToTwoUint32(
        bytes memory data
    ) public pure returns (uint32, uint32) {
        require(data.length >= 8, "Input bytes must be at least 8 bytes long");

        uint32 first = uint32(uint8(data[0])) |
            (uint32(uint8(data[1])) << 8) |
            (uint32(uint8(data[2])) << 16) |
            (uint32(uint8(data[3])) << 24);

        uint32 second = uint32(uint8(data[4])) |
            (uint32(uint8(data[5])) << 8) |
            (uint32(uint8(data[6])) << 16) |
            (uint32(uint8(data[7])) << 24);

        return (first, second);
    }
}
```

### Explanation

> 1. **Verification Key Check:** The contract first checks if the verification key commitment matches the Fibonacci Image ID commitment.

Reviewer: the same here, a lot of new terminology appears (verification key, image id commitment). At the end they all refer to the actual program code that the proof was made for. Let's keep that clear

Author: Solved in [63e68af](https://github.com/yetanotherco/aligned_layer/pull/648/commits/63e68af4b6e4c6465622854cdc29603b2f6daca7)

```solidity
require(
            fibonacciImageIdCommitment == provingSystemAuxDataCommitment,
            "Image ID doesn't match"
        );
```

> 2. **Public Input Commitment Validation:** The contract validates that the public input commitment matches the keccak256 hash of the journalBytes. It then extracts the last two Fibonacci numbers from the journalBytes and emits an event.

Reviewer: same with journalbytes, it is a terminology from risc0 but it could not be 100% clear for every user. Let's give a little more context

Author: Solved in [63e68af](https://github.com/yetanotherco/aligned_layer/pull/648/commits/63e68af4b6e4c6465622854cdc29603b2f6daca7)

        proofCommitment,
        pubInputCommitment,
        provingSystemAuxDataCommitment,
        proofGeneratorAddr,
        batchMerkleRoot,
        merkleProof,
        verificationDataBatchIndex
    )
);

require(callWasSuccessful, "static_call failed");
```

4. **Bytes to two `uint32` conversion:** A helper function to convert a byte array into two `uint32` numbers, used for extracting the last two Fibonacci numbers from the `journalBytes`.

```solidity
function bytesToTwoUint32(
    bytes memory data
) public pure returns (uint32, uint32) {
    require(data.length >= 8, "Input bytes must be at least 8 bytes long");

    uint32 first = uint32(uint8(data[0])) |
        (uint32(uint8(data[1])) << 8) |
        (uint32(uint8(data[2])) << 16) |
        (uint32(uint8(data[3])) << 24);

    uint32 second = uint32(uint8(data[4])) |
        (uint32(uint8(data[5])) << 8) |
        (uint32(uint8(data[6])) << 16) |
        (uint32(uint8(data[7])) << 24);

    return (first, second);
}
```

To deploy the contract, first you will need to set up the `.env` file in the contracts folder with the following variables:

```

> RPC_URL= #You can use publicnode RPC: https://ethereum-holesky-rpc.publicnode.com
> PRIVATE_KEY=
> ALIGNED_SERVICE_MANAGER_ADDRESS= #0x58F280BeBE9B34c9939C3C39e0890C81f163B623 for Holesky

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RPC_URL=<rpc_url> #You can use publicnode RPC: https://ethereum-holesky-rpc.publicnode.com
PRIVATE_KEY=<private_key>
ALIGNED_SERVICE_MANAGER_ADDRESS=<service_manager_address> #0x58F280BeBE9B34c9939C3C39e0890C81f163B623 for Holesky
```

Author: Solved in [bc4fa19](https://github.com/yetanotherco/aligned_layer/pull/648/commits/bc4fa195fe395fd6b590437e330ee8943ec792be)

This guide demonstrates how to validate a Risc0 proof using the Aligned SDK. The Risc0 program in this example is a Fibonacci sequence calculator. It generates a public input that corresponds to the last two Fibonacci numbers of the sequence, taken modulo 7919. Our goal is to validate, within a smart contract, that the public input commitments match these two numbers.

In this case, the Fibonacci number to be calculated is **500** and the last two numbers of the sequence modulo 7919 are **1268** and **1926**.

This guide assumes you are in the `examples/validating-public-input` directory.

## Generate your ZK Proof

> [!IMPORTANT]  

> > To generate the proof ensure you have [docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) installed.
> > This is necessary because the program and identifier may differ based on your operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> To generate the proof ensure you have [docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) installed and the docker daemon running.
> This is necessary to ensure deterministic builds of the binary we want to generate a proof of. If not used, builds may differ depending on the system you are running on. To know more about this, check [this link](https://dev.risczero.com/terminology#deterministic-builds) from RiscZero docs.
```
